docs: add "Development Workflow" documentation (#296)
shorebirdtech/docs: src/content/docs/guides/development-workflow.mdx

---
title: Development Workflow
description: Learn how to integrate Shorebird into your development workflow with automated releases and patches.
---

import RemoteCode from '~/components/RemoteCode.astro';
import CICheckSnippet from '~/components/guides/development-workflow/CICheckSnippet.astro';

This guide will walk through an opinionated development workflow with Shorebird.
We'll cover how to automate releasing and patching with Shorebird to streamline
the development process.

## Prerequisites

This guide assumes you are already familiar with Shorebird and have integrated
it into your application. Refer to the [getting started](/) instructions for

> more information.

Reviewer: Other prereqs probably include familiarity with Git and a working CI setup

## Overview

Shorebird provides a set of tools that you can use to push over the air updates
to your customers but it's up to you to decide how to integrate it into your
development workflow.

While there are many ways to integrate Shorebird, the following workflow is a
common approach that we recommend:

![development-workflow](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/59eaefc4-1213-4549-b0d6-38738b065147)

The illustration above, uses [trunk based
development](https://trunkbaseddevelopment.com) and tags to trigger automated
release and patch workflows.

The workflow consists of three main phases:

1. **Development**: Developers work on features and bug fixes.
1. **Release**: When a feature is ready, a release is created and distributed to
   customers (typically via stores).

> 1. **Patch**: If a critical bug is found, a patch is created and distributed to

Reviewer 2: Might just be a smaller change, rather than bug.  I think some customers want to ship with Shorebird constantly for little features.

Author: Yeah I was mainly trying to stay focused on the critical bug fixes angle but happy to re-frame 🤷

   customers immediately via Shorebird.

Let's walk through each phase in more detail.

## Development

> Most of the time is spent in the development phase. During this phase,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During this phase,
```
I wouldn't assume 🤷

> Most of the time is spent in the development phase. During this phase,
> developers are building features and fixing bugs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During this phase, developers are building features and fixing bugs.
```

The development workflow can be broken down into the following steps:

1. Create branch from trunk (main)
1. Work on task
1. Open a pull request to merge changes into trunk

> 1. Squash and merge after ci checks & code review

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Squash and merge after CI checks & code review
```

> 1. Squash and merge after ci checks & code review

Reviewer: Should we explain what "squash and merge" is?

Reviewer: We also probably want to define this the first time it's used instead of later on

Note that with the described workflow, the trunk (e.g. main) is always in a
releasable state. This puts pressure on continuous integration (CI) checks to ensure
that the code on the trunk is always in a healthy, deployable state. Checks that would
typically run as part of the continuous integration process include:

- Linting
- Formatting
- Unit tests
- Integration tests
- Test coverage reports

You can refer to the following GitHub Actions workflow for an example.

<CICheckSnippet />

## Release

When the team is ready to distribute a new version of the app, a release is
created. In some cases, releases are created on a regular cadence (e.g. weekly,
bi-weekly, monthly) while in other cases, releases are created on an ad-hoc
basis.

The release workflow can be broken down into the following steps:

1. Create a release branch (e.g release/v1.0.0) from trunk (main)

> 1. Tag the commit (e.g v1.0.0)

Reviewer 2: Do we need to explain why?

1. The release workflow is triggered and generates signed artifacts
1. Distribute the artifacts (e.g. via AppStore, PlayStore, etc.)

You can refer to the following GitHub Actions workflow for an example.

<RemoteCode
  url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/felangel/flutter_and_friends/refs/heads/main/.github/workflows/release.yaml"
  title=".github/workflows/release.yaml"
/>

When the release workflow has finished running, the artifacts are ready to be
distributed to customers via the appropriate channels (e.g. AppStore, PlayStore,
etc.).

> ![Release Workflow](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7c9cf689-bd07-40c0-ad0b-e08935cb4424)

Reviewer 2: Is this a permanent url?

:::note
For more information about configuring signing refer to the following links:

- [Create an Upload Keystore (Android)](https://docs.flutter.dev/deployment/android#create-an-upload-keystore)
- [Installing an Apple Certificate on MacOS Runners (iOS)](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/use-cases-and-examples/deploying/installing-an-apple-certificate-on-macos-runners-for-xcode-development)
  :::

## Patch

> Sometimes, despite lots testing, critical bugs can creep into the app. Shorebird

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even with great testing, sometimes bugs can creep into the app. Shorebird
```

> allows you to fix these bugs and distribute the patches to customers devices
> immediately rather having to wait for releases to be approved and distributed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allows you to fix these bugs and distribute the patches to customers devices
immediately rather having to wait for users to update.
```

## Development Phase

Most of the time is spent in the development phase. During this phase,
developers are building features and fixing bugs.

The development workflow can be broken down into the following steps:

1. Create branch from trunk (main)
1. Work on task
1. Open a pull request to merge changes into trunk
1. Squash and merge after ci checks & code review

Note that with the described workflow, the trunk (e.g. main) is always in a
releasable state. This puts pressure on continuous integration (CI) checks to ensure
that the code on the trunk is always in a healthy, deployable state. Checks that would
typically run as part of the continuous integration process include:

- Linting
- Formatting
- Unit tests
- Integration tests
- Test coverage reports

You can refer to the following GitHub Actions workflow for an example.

<CICheckSnippet />

## Release Phase

When the team is ready to distribute a new version of the app, a release is
created. In some cases, releases are created on a regular cadence (e.g. weekly,
bi-weekly, monthly) while in other cases, releases are created on an ad-hoc
basis.

The release workflow can be broken down into the following steps:

> 1. Create a release branch (e.g release/v1.0.0) from trunk (main)

Reviewer: Should we lean on Github releases for this?

Author: Yup I was just spelling out the explicit steps but yeah I can reword to leverage releases

1. Tag the commit (e.g v1.0.0)
1. The release workflow is triggered and generates signed artifacts
1. Distribute the artifacts (e.g. via AppStore, PlayStore, etc.)

You can refer to the following GitHub Actions workflow for an example.

<RemoteCode
  url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/felangel/flutter_and_friends/refs/heads/main/.github/workflows/release.yaml"
  title=".github/workflows/release.yaml"
/>

> When the release workflow has finished running, the artifacts are ready to be

Reviewer: "(e.g. AppStore, PlayStore, etc.)." feels redundant here

distributed to customers via the appropriate channels (e.g. AppStore, PlayStore,
etc.).

![Release Workflow](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7c9cf689-bd07-40c0-ad0b-e08935cb4424)

:::note
For more information about configuring signing refer to the following links:

- [Create an Upload Keystore (Android)](https://docs.flutter.dev/deployment/android#create-an-upload-keystore)
- [Installing an Apple Certificate on MacOS Runners (iOS)](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/use-cases-and-examples/deploying/installing-an-apple-certificate-on-macos-runners-for-xcode-development)

:::

## Patch Phase

Sometimes, despite lots testing, critical bugs can creep into the app. Shorebird
allows you to fix these bugs and distribute the patches to customers devices
immediately rather having to wait for releases to be approved and distributed.

The patch workflow can be broken down into the follow steps:

> 1. Apply the hotfix to the trunk (identical to the development workflow above)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Fix the bug on the trunk branch using the development workflow described above.
```

I don't know that the substeps are necessary here

   1. Create a branch from trunk (main)
   1. Fix the bug
   1. Open a pull request to merge changes into trunk
   1. Squash and merge after ci checks & code review

> 1. Cherry pick the commit into the desired release branch(es)

Reviewer: I'm not sure the average developer knows how to do this. Might be good to include an example.

1. Tag the commit using -hotfix.x (e.g v1.0.0-hotfix.1)

> 1. The patch workflow is triggered and uploads the hotfix to the staging environment

Reviewer: What triggers this workflow?

Author: The -hotfix tag. I'll elaborate 👍

> 1. Preview the release in the staging environment & validate the fix

Reviewer: Preview the release in the staging environment how?

Reviewer: Generally, there's a lot happening in the yaml below. We should definitely include that (people love examples they can copy and tweak), but it'd be good call out specific commands for these steps, either in this list or as comments in the yaml
